iceking.md, before:

# Ice King Master Spec (Current Branch)

Last updated: 2026-02-23

This document is the implementation-aligned spec for the current client-first branch.
If this file conflicts with code, update this file in the same change set.

## Current Build Scope
- Primary playable mode is `Play vs Computer`.
- `Create Game` and `Join Game` use the `/api/multiplayer/*` room flow via authoritative in-process room middleware.
- Multiplayer authority is currently in-memory in the Vite host process (no persistent dedicated server yet).
- Multiplayer room middleware currently supports `create`, `join`, `ready`, `start`, `state`, `action`, and `chat`.
- Reconnect and room-expiry UX are now implemented:
  - Player sessions are token-bound (`P1`/`P2` with persistent room tokens).
  - Active matches pause when a player disconnects and resume messaging is shown while waiting for reconnect.
  - Idle rooms eventually return `ROOM_EXPIRED` with actionable detail text.
- Gameplay runs in a local deterministic engine (`packages/game-core`) inside the client runtime.
- LLM bot decisions are supported through Vite middleware (`/api/bot/decide`) with heuristic fallback.

## Current Non-Negotiables
1. Playable world size is `10 x 10` tiles with a non-interactable `1` tile `VOID` border ring around it (runtime grid is `12 x 12`).
2. Main viewport renders `5 x 5` tiles.
3. Internal render uses `256 x 256` tile assets per tile (`1280 x 1280` canvas for the `5 x 5` viewport).
4. Main map is shown in a centered square stage that scales uniformly to fit the browser window (max `1280 x 1280`, letterboxing allowed).
5. Minimap is always visible in a right-side rail (outside main game area), and supports drag-to-pan/click-to-pan.
5.1 Minimap renders playable tiles only (the `VOID` border ring is hidden there), so the red camera rectangle can extend off-minimap near far map edges.
6. Tile interactions:
- Drag on main map pans camera.
- Single click selects tile only.
- Second click on the same tile opens tile action menu.
- Drag release suppresses accidental click-open.
7. Tile action menu appears as a popup anchored above the selected tile and is shown on the second click.
8. Stats panel is placed in the right-side rail (outside map area), collapsible, and layered above map/overlays.
8.1 A second stats section, `Other User's Stats`, appears under player stats and uses the opponent color as its border.
8.2 Instructions panel is above Stats in that same rail, collapsed by default, and explains core rules.
8.3 Multiplayer mode adds a dedicated left-side chat rail that fills stage height and supports emoji text chat.
9. Splash screen appears at root (`/`) every visit and includes first menu actions.
10. Seasons use 9 keyframes for visual transition while gameplay logic flips at season boundary.

## Core Gameplay Loop
1. Buy territory.
2. Own and operate ponds during winter.
3. Harvest and collect ice when ready (default `1:00`).
4. Avoid summer melt with refrigerators.
5. Build factories and man-made ponds on owned `GRASS`/`FOREST` tiles.
6. Craft refrigerators or blue ice at owned factories.
7. Sell at owned houses and use train yearly shipment window.
8. Win on net worth at match end.

## Economy Defaults (Current)
- Start per player: `$20`, `0 ice`, `0 blue ice`, `1 refrigerator`.
- Buy unowned tile: `$1`.
- Buyout owned tile: `currentPrice + $1` fee.
- Build factory: `2 ice + $2`.
- Build man-made pond: `1 ice + $2`.
- Start pond harvest: `$1` (winter only).
- Sell at house (Summer only):
- Ice: `$2` each.
- Blue ice: `$8` each.
- Factory craft:
- Refrigerator: `2 ice + $2`, `2:00` duration.
- Blue ice: `2 ice + $2`, `2:00` duration.
- Train shipment: `3 ice -> $9`, once per in-game year.
- Refrigerator capacity: `2 regular ice` per refrigerator.
- Melt rule: on `WINTER -> SUMMER`, unrefrigerated regular ice loses `50%` (floor).

## Timing Defaults (Current)
- Match start season: `WINTER`.
- `PROD`:
- Season: `5:00`
- Transition window: last `1:00`
- Pond harvest: `1:00`
- Craft duration: `2:00`
- Match duration: `30:00`
- `DEV_FAST` (`?fast=1`):
- Season: `1:15`
- Transition: `0:15`
- Pond harvest: `1:00`
- Craft: `0:20`
- Match: `8:00`

## Map Generation Defaults (Current)
- Tile types: `GRASS`, `FOREST`, `POND`, `HOUSE`, `FACTORY`, `TRAIN`, `VOID`.
- Generated at match start by seed.
- A `1` tile `VOID` border ring wraps all generated playable tiles.
- `VOID` border tiles are not selectable, not purchasable, and never valid for gameplay actions.
- Baseline map content:
- Natural pond centers: `3`
- Houses: `4`
- Train: `1`
- Factories at start: `0`
- Forest density: `0.12`

## Bot Rules (Current)
- Bot is `P2` and uses exact same `GameAction` validation path as human.
- Bot cannot mutate state directly.
- External mode uses LLM to pick one action from legal allowed action list.
- Invalid/unavailable LLM output falls back to deterministic heuristic policy.
- LLM calls are throttled and only attempted during strategic windows; low-value turns use heuristic policy directly.
- After each accepted bot action, the bot waits `20-30` seconds before creating its next action.

## Controls (Current)
- Camera: `WASD`/arrow keys, minimap drag, or map drag.
- Tile interaction: click once to select, click same tile again for actions.
- Fullscreen: `F`.
- Exit fullscreen: `Esc`.
- Debug panel: `F3`.
- Forfeit: `Q`.

## Environment
- Copy `.env.example` to `.env` (repo root) or `apps/client/.env`.
- Required for live LLM bot: `OPENAI_API_KEY`.
- Default bot model: `gpt-5-nano`.

## Current Monorepo Boundaries
```text
/apps/client          # Vite client, runtime, rendering, HUD, bot middleware
/packages/game-core   # Deterministic systems + engine
/packages/shared      # Shared types + action schema
/packages/config      # Tunable constants
/packages/theme-default # Palette + transition helpers
```

## Near-Term Roadmap
1. Continue deepening play-vs-computer mechanics and balancing.
2. Expand content variation and transition art coverage.
3. Move multiplayer room authority from Vite in-memory middleware to a dedicated backend service.
4. Add cross-instance persistence and multi-instance room synchronization.

## Validation Baseline
- `npm run test`
- `npm run build`
- `npm run test:multiplayer:ui`
- Playwright flow: splash -> lobby -> match -> camera/action interactions -> no console errors
- Keep `window.render_game_to_text()` and `window.advanceTime(ms)` operational.
- `npm run test` now includes multiplayer API regression (`create -> join -> ready -> start -> action -> reconnect -> expiry`).

Commit message:

Set money-based winner and sync docs for emoji chat popup

iceking.md, after:

# Ice King Master Spec (Current Branch)

Last updated: 2026-02-23

This document is the implementation-aligned spec for the current client-first branch.
If this file conflicts with code, update this file in the same change set.

## Current Build Scope
- Primary playable mode is `Play vs Computer`.
- `Create Game` and `Join Game` use the `/api/multiplayer/*` room flow via authoritative in-process room middleware.
- Multiplayer authority is currently in-memory in the Vite host process (no persistent dedicated server yet).
- Multiplayer room middleware currently supports `create`, `join`, `ready`, `start`, `state`, `action`, and `chat`.
- Reconnect and room-expiry UX are now implemented:
  - Player sessions are token-bound (`P1`/`P2` with persistent room tokens).
  - Active matches pause when a player disconnects and resume messaging is shown while waiting for reconnect.
  - Idle rooms eventually return `ROOM_EXPIRED` with actionable detail text.
- Gameplay runs in a local deterministic engine (`packages/game-core`) inside the client runtime.
- LLM bot decisions are supported through Vite middleware (`/api/bot/decide`) with heuristic fallback.

## Current Non-Negotiables
1. Playable world size is `10 x 10` tiles with a non-interactable `1` tile `VOID` border ring around it (runtime grid is `12 x 12`).
2. Main viewport renders `5 x 5` tiles.
3. Internal render uses `256 x 256` tile assets per tile (`1280 x 1280` canvas for the `5 x 5` viewport).
4. Main map is shown in a centered square stage that scales uniformly to fit the browser window (max `1280 x 1280`, letterboxing allowed).
5. Minimap is always visible in a right-side rail (outside main game area), and supports drag-to-pan/click-to-pan.
5.1 Minimap renders playable tiles only (the `VOID` border ring is hidden there), so the red camera rectangle can extend off-minimap near far map edges.
6. Tile interactions:
- Drag on main map pans camera.
- Single click selects tile only.
- Second click on the same tile opens tile action menu.
- Drag release suppresses accidental click-open.
7. Tile action menu appears as a popup anchored above the selected tile and is shown on the second click.
8. Stats panel is placed in the right-side rail (outside map area), collapsible, and layered above map/overlays.
8.1 A second stats section, `Other User's Stats`, appears under player stats and uses the opponent color as its border.
8.2 Instructions panel is above Stats in that same rail, collapsed by default, and explains core rules.
8.3 Multiplayer mode adds a dedicated left-side chat rail that fills stage height and supports emoji text chat with an emoji-picker popup.
9. Splash screen appears at root (`/`) every visit and includes first menu actions.
10. Seasons use 9 keyframes for visual transition while gameplay logic flips at season boundary.

## Core Gameplay Loop
1. Buy territory.
2. Own and operate ponds during winter.
3. Harvest and collect ice when ready (default `1:00`).
4. Avoid summer melt with refrigerators.
5. Build factories and man-made ponds on owned `GRASS`/`FOREST` tiles.
6. Craft refrigerators or blue ice at owned factories.
7. Sell at owned houses and use train yearly shipment window.
8. Win on highest money at match end.

## Economy Defaults (Current)
- Start per player: `$20`, `0 ice`, `0 blue ice`, `1 refrigerator`.
- Buy unowned tile: `$1`.
- Buyout owned tile: `currentPrice + $1` fee.
- Build factory: `2 ice + $2`.
- Build man-made pond: `1 ice + $2`.
- Start pond harvest: `$1` (winter only).
- Sell at house (Summer only):
- Ice: `$2` each.
- Blue ice: `$8` each.
- Factory craft:
- Refrigerator: `2 ice + $2`, `2:00` duration.
- Blue ice: `2 ice + $2`, `2:00` duration.
- Train shipment: `3 ice -> $9`, once per in-game year.
- Refrigerator capacity: `2 regular ice` per refrigerator.
- Melt rule: on `WINTER -> SUMMER`, unrefrigerated regular ice loses `50%` (floor).

## Timing Defaults (Current)
- Match start season: `WINTER`.
- `PROD`:
- Season: `5:00`
- Transition window: last `1:00`
- Pond harvest: `1:00`
- Craft duration: `2:00`
- Match duration: `30:00`
- `DEV_FAST` (`?fast=1`):
- Season: `1:15`
- Transition: `0:15`
- Pond harvest: `1:00`
- Craft: `0:20`
- Match: `8:00`

## Map Generation Defaults (Current)
- Tile types: `GRASS`, `FOREST`, `POND`, `HOUSE`, `FACTORY`, `TRAIN`, `VOID`.
- Generated at match start by seed.
- A `1` tile `VOID` border ring wraps all generated playable tiles.
- `VOID` border tiles are not selectable, not purchasable, and never valid for gameplay actions.
- Baseline map content:
- Natural pond centers: `3`
- Houses: `4`
- Train: `1`
- Factories at start: `0`
- Forest density: `0.12`

## Bot Rules (Current)
- Bot is `P2` and uses exact same `GameAction` validation path as human.
- Bot cannot mutate state directly.
- External mode uses LLM to pick one action from legal allowed action list.
- Invalid/unavailable LLM output falls back to deterministic heuristic policy.
- LLM calls are throttled and only attempted during strategic windows; low-value turns use heuristic policy directly.
- After each accepted bot action, the bot waits `20-30` seconds before creating its next action.

## Controls (Current)
- Camera: `WASD`/arrow keys, minimap drag, or map drag.
- Tile interaction: click once to select, click same tile again for actions.
- Fullscreen: `F`.
- Exit fullscreen: `Esc`.
- Debug panel: `F3`.
- Forfeit: `Q`.

## Environment
- Copy `.env.example` to `.env` (repo root) or `apps/client/.env`.
- Required for live LLM bot: `OPENAI_API_KEY`.
- Default bot model: `gpt-5-nano`.

## Current Monorepo Boundaries
```text
/apps/client          # Vite client, runtime, rendering, HUD, bot middleware
/packages/game-core   # Deterministic systems + engine
/packages/shared      # Shared types + action schema
/packages/config      # Tunable constants
/packages/theme-default # Palette + transition helpers
```

## Near-Term Roadmap
1. Continue deepening play-vs-computer mechanics and balancing.
2. Expand content variation and transition art coverage.
3. Move multiplayer room authority from Vite in-memory middleware to a dedicated backend service.
4. Add cross-instance persistence and multi-instance room synchronization.

## Validation Baseline
- `npm run test`
- `npm run build`
- `npm run test:multiplayer:ui`
- Playwright flow: splash -> lobby -> match -> camera/action interactions -> no console errors
- Keep `window.render_game_to_text()` and `window.advanceTime(ms)` operational.
- `npm run test` now includes multiplayer API regression (`create -> join -> ready -> start -> action -> reconnect -> expiry`).
